[ADD] Localizations: Functional documentation for l10n_cl_edi (#745)
odoo/documentation-user: accounting/fiscal_localizations/localizations/chile.rst

=====
Chile
=====

Introduction
============

> The Chilean localization has been improved and extended in Odoo v13,in this version the next 
> modules are available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chilean localization has been improved and extended in Odoo v13. In this version, the next 
modules are available:
```

- **l10n_cl:** Adds accounting features for the Chilean localization, which represent the minimal 
  configuration required for a company to operate in Chile and under the SII 
  (Servicio de Impuestos Internos) regulations and guidelines.
  
- **l10n_cl_edi:** Includes all technical and functional requirements to generate and receive 
  Electronic Invoice via web service, based on the SII regulations. 

- **l10n_cl_reports:** Adds the reports Propuesta F29 y  Balance Tributario (8 columnas). 

Configuration
=============

Install the Chilean localization modules
----------------------------------------

> For this, go to *Apps* and search for Chile. Then click *Install* in the module Chile 
> E-invoicing, this module has a dependency with Chile - Accounting in case this last
> one is not installed, Odoo installs it automatically with E-invoicing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, go to *Apps* and search for Chile. Then click *Install* in the module **Chile 
E-invoicing**. This module has a dependency with **Chile - Accounting**. In case this last
one is not installed, Odoo installs it automatically with E-invoicing.
```

> .. image:: media/Chile01.png
>    :align: center

Reviewer: Ideally, add *alt* tags to all your images on the page.
Confer this [doc](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/user/13.0/contributing/documentation/content_guidelines.html#alt-tags).

For example
```suggestion
.. image:: media/Chile01.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Chilean module to install on Odoo.
```

.. note::
   When you install a database from scratch selecting Chile as country, Odoo will automatically
   install the base module: Chile - Accounting.
   
   
Company Settings
----------------
Once the modules are installed, the first step is to set up your company data. Additional
to the basic information, you need to add all the data and elements required for Electronic 

> Invoice, the easiest way to configure it is in 
> :menuselection:`Accounting --> Settings --> Chilean Localization`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Invoice, the easiest way to configure it is in 
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Settings --> Chilean Localization`.
```

Fiscal Information
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Fill in the fiscal information for your company according to the SII register, follow the
instructions on each section.

.. image:: media/Chile02.png
   :align: center
   
Electronic Invoice Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This is part of the main information required to generate electronic Invoice, select your
environment and the legal information, as well as the email address to receive invoices
from your vendors and the alias you use to send invoices to your customers.

.. image:: media/Chile03.png
   :align: center

Configure DTE Incoming email server
***********************************

> In order to receive you the claim and acceptance emails from your customers it is
> crucial to define the DTE incoming email server, considering this configuration: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to receive you the claim and acceptance emails from your customers, it is
crucial to define the DTE incoming email server, considering this configuration: 
```

.. image:: media/Chile03_2.png
   :align: center

.. tip::
   For your Go-live make sure you archive/remove from your inbox all the emails
   related to vendor bills that are not required to be processed in Odoo. 
   
Certificate
~~~~~~~~~~~

> In order to generate the electronic invoice signature, a digital certificate with extension(.pfx)
> is required, proceed to this section and load your file and password. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to generate the electronic invoice signature, a digital certificate with the extension ``.pfx``
is required, proceed to this section and load your file and password. 
```

.. image:: media/Chile03_3.png
   :align: center

.. image:: media/Chile04.png
   :align: center

> A certificate can be shared between several users, if this is the case leave the user field empty,
> so all your billing users can use the same one. On the other hand,  if you need to restrict the
> certificate for a particular user, just define the users in the certificate. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A certificate can be shared between several users. If this is the case leave the user field empty,
so all your billing users can use the same one. On the other hand,  if you need to restrict the
certificate for a particular user, just define the users in the certificate. 

```

Financial Reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The report Propuesta F29 requires two values that need to be defined as part of the company
configuration: 

.. image:: media/Chile05.png
   :align: center

Multicurrency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The official currency rate in Chile is provided by the SBIF, you can find the SBIF
synchronization service in the currency rate configuration and you can set a predefined interval
for the rate updates.  

.. image:: media/Chile05_2.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 25

In order to configure your token, you need to enable developer mode and access to
:menuselection:`Settings --> Technical --> System parameters` and search the parameter
``sbif_api_key`` and in the field Value introduce your token provided by the SBIF:

.. image:: media/Chile05_3.png
   :align: center
   
Chart of accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The chart of accounts is installed by default as part of the set of data included in
> the localization module, the accounts are mapped automatically in: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chart of accounts is installed by default as part of the set of data included in
the localization module. The accounts are mapped automatically in: 
```

- Taxes.
- Default Account Payable.
- Default Account Receivable.
- Transfer Accounts.
- Conversion Rate.

Master Data
-----------

Partner
~~~~~~~
Identification Type and VAT
***************************

> As part of the Chilean localization, the identification types defined by the SII
> are now available on the Partner form, this information is essential for most transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the Chilean localization, the identification types defined by the SII
are now available on the Partner form. This information is essential for most transactions.
```

.. image:: media/Chile06.png
   :align: center

>    :scale: 25

Reviewer: Is the scale a way to make the image tinier?
Try to change the height instead. It should work

Author: Image updated in the last commit.

 
TaxpayerType
************

> In Chile the document type associated with customers and vendors transactions is defined
> based on the Taxpayer Type, this field should be defined in the partner form, when creating
> a customer is important you make sure this value is set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Chile, the document type associated with customers and vendors transactions is defined
based on the Taxpayer Type. This field should be defined in the partner form, when creating
a customer is important you make sure this value is set:
```

.. image:: media/Chile07.png
   :align: center
 

Electronic Invoice Data
***********************
As part of the information that is sent in the electronic Invoice, you need to define the
email that is going to appear as the sender of the electronic invoice to your customer, and
the Industry description. 

.. image:: media/Chile07_2.png
   :align: center
 

Taxes
~~~~~

> As part of the localization module the taxes are created automatically with their related
> financial account and configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the localization module, the taxes are created automatically with their related
financial account and configuration.
```

.. image:: media/Chile08.png
   :align: center

Taxes Types
***********
Chile has several tax types, the most common ones are:

- VAT. Is the regular VAT and it can have several rates. 

> - ILA (Impuesto a la Ley de Alcholes). Taxes for alcoholic drinks, it has a different rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ILA (Impuesto a la Ley de Alcholes). Taxes for alcoholic drinks. It has a different rate.
```

Fiscal Positions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Based on the purchase transactions the VAT can have different affections, this will be done
> in Odoo using the default purchase fiscal positions. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the purchase transactions, the VAT can have different affections. This will be done
in Odoo using the default purchase fiscal positions. 

```

Document Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In some Latin America countries, including Chile, some accounting transactions like invoices and
> vendor bills are classified by  document types defined by the government fiscal authorities (In
> Chile case: SII).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some Latin American countries, including Chile, some accounting transactions like invoices and
vendor bills are classified by document types defined by the government fiscal authorities (In
Chile case: SII).
```

> The document type is an essential information that needs to be displayed in the printed reports and
> that needs to be easily identified, within the set of invoices as well of account moves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The document type is essential information that needs to be displayed in the printed reports and
that needs to be easily identified within the set of invoices as well of account moves.
```

> Each document type can have a unique sequence per journal where it is assigned. As part of the
> localization, the Document Type include the country on which the document is applicable and the data
> is created automatically when the localization module is installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each document type can have a unique sequence per journal where it is assigned. As part of the
localization, the Document Type includes the country on which the document is applicable and the data
is created automatically when the localization module is installed.
```

The information required for the document types is included by default so the user doesn't need to
fill anything on this view:

.. image:: media/Chile09.png
   :align: center

.. note::
   There are several document types that are inactive by default but can be activated if needed.

Use on Invoices
***************
The document type on each transaction will be determined by:

- The Journal related to the Invoice, identifying if the journal uses documents.
- Condition applied based on the type of Issues and Receiver (ex. Type of fiscal
  regimen of the buyer and type of fiscal regimen of the vendor).
  

Journals
--------

Usage
~~~~~

Sales
*****
Sales Journals in Odoo usually represent a business unit or location, example:

- Ventas Santiago.
- Ventas Valparaiso.

For the retail stores is common to have one journal per POS: 

- Cashier 1.
- Cashier 2.

Purchases
*********
The transactions purchase can be managed with a single journal, but sometimes companies use
more than one in order to handle some accounting transactions that are not related to vendor

> bills but can be easily register using this model, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bills but can be easily registered using this model, for example:
```

- Tax Payments to government.
- Employees payments.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
When creating sales journals the next information must be filled in: 

> **Point of sale type**: If the Sales journal will be used for electronic documents the option
> Online must be selected, otherwise if the journal is used for invoices imported from a previous
> system or if you are using the SII portal “Facturación MiPyme“ you can use the option Manual. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Point of sale type**: If the Sales journal will be used for electronic documents, the option
Online must be selected. Otherwise, if the journal is used for invoices imported from a previous
system or if you are using the SII portal “Facturación MiPyme“ you can use the option Manual. 
```

> **Use Documents**: This field is used to define if the journal will use Document Types, it’s only
> applicable on Purchase and Sales journals which are the ones that can be related to the
> differentset of document types available in Chile. By default all the sales journals created will
> use documents. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Use Documents**: This field is used to define if the journal will use Document Types. It is only
applicable to Purchase and Sales journals that can be related to the
different sets of document types available in Chile. By default, all the sales journals created will
use documents. 
```

   :align: center

Sequences
*********
When a Journal is created we have two options with document types sequences. 

1. Create new sequences: In this case, Odoo will create new sequences for the most common document
   types. 
2. Use existent sequence: If the sequence should be shared between several journals, the user can
   add manually sequences previously created.  

.. image:: media/Chile11.png
   :align: center
   
.. important::
   For the Chilean localization it’s important to define the default Debt and Credit accounts 
   as they are required for one of the debit notes use cases.
   
CAF
***
For each sequence related to the documents type, a CAF (Folio Authorization Code) is required,
the CAF is a file the SII provides to the Emisor with the folio/sequence authorized for the 
electronic invoice documents.

Your company can make several requests for folios and obtain several CAFs, each one associated
with different ranges of folios. In this way, you could order folios per the different
segmentations you have in your journals (example per office) thus avoiding distributing a range
of folios. In this way, each branch would have its private key of the respective CAF.

> Please refer to the SII documentation to check the detail how to acquire the CAF:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to the SII documentation to check the detail on how to acquire the CAF:
```

`SII Timbraje <https://palena.sii.cl/dte/mn_timbraje.html>`_.

	
Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Once you have the CAF files you need to associate them with journal sequence in Odoo,
after you create the sequence for the first time the will be in red, which indicates
that no CAF has been configured for that particular sequence:

.. image:: media/Chile12.png
   :align: center

In order to add a CAF, just follow these steps:

1. Open the sequence. 
2. Go the the Tab “CAF”.
3. Upload the file.
4. Save the CAF.
5. Save the sequence. 

.. image:: media/Chile13.gif
   :align: center

> As a result the sequence color changes to black an the column Next number and quantity
> available are updated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the sequence color changes to black and the column Next number and quantity
available are updated:
```

Usage and Testing
=================

Electronic Invoice Workflow
---------------------------
In the Chilean localization the electronic Invoice workflow covers the Emission of
Customer Invoices and the reception of Vendor Bills, in the next diagram we explain how
the information transmitted to the SII and between the customers and Vendors. 

.. image:: media/Chile14.png
   :align: center

Customer invoice Emission
-------------------------
After the partners and journals are created and configured, the invoices are created in
the standard way, for Chile one of the differentiators is the document type which is selected
automatically based on the Taxpayer. 

You can manually change the document type if needed. 

.. image:: media/Chile15.png
   :align: center

Validation and DTE Status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
When all the invoice information is filled, either manually or automatically when it’s created
from a sales order, proceed to validate the invoice.  After the invoice is posted:

- The DTE File (Electronic Tax Document) is created automatically and added in the chatter.
- The DTE SII status is set as: Pending to be sent. 

  .. image:: media/Chile16.png
     :align: center

> The DTE Status is updated automatically by Odoo with an scheduled action that runs every day

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DTE Status is updated automatically by Odoo with a scheduled action that runs every day
```

   and it’s automatically sent to the customer. 

   **Accepted with objections:** Indicates the invoice information is correct but a minor issue
   was identified, nevertheless our document is now fiscally valid and it’s automatically
   sent to the customer.

   .. image:: media/Chile19.png
      :align: center

   **Rejected:** Indicates the information in the invoice is incorrect and needs to be
   corrected, the detail of the issue is received in the emails you registered in the
   SII, if it is properly configured in Odoo, the details are also retrieved
   in the chatter once the email server is processed.
	 
   If the invoice is Rejected please follow this steps:
	 
   * Change the document to draft.
   * Make the required corrections based on the message received from the SII.
   * Post the invoice again.
	 
   .. image:: media/Chile20.png
      :align: center

Crossed references
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
When the Invoice is created as a result of another fiscal document, the information related to the
originator document must be registered in the Tab Cross Reference, which is commonly used for 

> credit or debit notes, but in some cases can be used on Customer Invoices as well. In case of the
> credit and debit notes it is set automatically by Odoo:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
credit or debit notes, but in some cases can be used on Customer Invoices as well. In the case of the
credit and debit notes, they are set automatically by Odoo:
```

.. image:: media/Chile21.png
   :align: center

Invoice PDF Report
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
After the invoice is Accepted and valdiated by the SII and the PDF is printed it includes the
fiscal elements that indicates out document is fiscally valid:

.. image:: media/Chile22.png
   :align: center

Commercial Validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Once the invoice has been sent to the customer:

1. DTE partner status changes to “Sent”.
2. The customer must send a reception confirmation email.
3. Subsequently, if all the commercial terms and invoice data are correct, they will send the
   Acceptance confirmation, otherwise they send a Claim.
4. The field DTE acceptation status is updated automatically. 

.. image:: media/Chile23.png
   :align: center

Processed for Claimed invoices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Once the invoice has been Accepted by the SII **it can not be cancelled in Odoo**.  In case you
get a Claim for your customer the correct way to proceed is with a Credit Note to either cancel
the Invoice or correct it. Please refer to the Credit Notes section for more details. 

.. image:: media/Chile24.png
   :align: center

Common Errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> There are multiple reasons behind a rejection from the SII, but these are some of the common erros

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple reasons behind a rejection from the SII, but these are some of the common errors
```

you might have and which is the related solution. 

- Error: RECHAZO- DTE Sin Comuna Origen.
  
  *Hint:* Make sure the Company Address is properly filled including the State and City. 

- Error en Monto :  - IVA debe declararse.
  
  *Hint:* The invoice lines should include one VAT tax, make sure you add one on each invoice line. 

- Error: Rut No Autorizado a Firmar.
  
  *Hint:* The invoice lines should include one VAT tax, make sure you add one on each invoice line. 

- Error: Fecha/Número Resolucion Invalido RECHAZO- CAF Vencido : (Firma_DTE[AAAA-MM-DD] - 
  CAF[AAAA-MM-DD]) &gt; 6 meses.
  
  *Hint:* Try to add a new CAF in the journal sequence related to this document as the one you’re 
  using is expired. 

Credit Notes
------------

> When a cancellation or correction is needed over a validated invoice, a credit note must be
> generated, it’s important to consider that a CAF file is required for the Credit Note sequence,
> which is identified as document 64 in the SII.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a cancellation or correction is needed over a validated invoice, a credit note must be
generated. It is important to consider that a CAF file is required for the Credit Note sequence,
which is identified as document 64 in the SII.  
```

.. image:: media/Chile25.png
   :align: center

.. tip:: Refer to the journal section where we described the process to load the CAF on each 
   sequence.

Use Cases
~~~~~~~~~

Cancel Referenced document
**************************

> In case you need  to cancel or invalid a Invoice, use the button Add Credit note and select Full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you need  to cancel or invalid an Invoice, use the button Add Credit note and select Full
```

- Automatically Send the reception acknowledgement to your vendor. 
- Accept or Claim the document and send this status to your vendor. 

Reception
~~~~~~~~~
As soon as the vendor email with the attached DTE is received:
1. The vendor Bill mapping all the information included in the xml.
2. An email is sent to the vendor with the Reception acknowledgement. 
3. The DTE status is set as:  Acuse de Recibido Enviado

.. image:: media/Chile34.png
   :align: center

Acceptation
~~~~~~~~~~~
If all the commercial information is correct on your vendor bill, you can accept the document using
the button: Aceptar Documento, once this is done the DTE Acceptation Status  changes to: Accepted and
an email of acceptance is sent to the vendor. 

.. image:: media/Chile35.png
   :align: center

Claim
~~~~~
In case there is a commercial issue or the information is not correct on your vendor bill, you can
Claim the document before validating it,  using the button: Claim, once this is done the DTE
Acceptation Status  change to: Claim  and an email of acceptance is sent to the vendor. 

.. image:: media/Chile36.png
   :align: center

> If you claim a vendor bill the status changes from draft to cancel automatically, considering this
> as best practice, all the Claim documents should be cancelled as they won’t be valid for your
> accounting records. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you claim a vendor bill, the status changes from draft to cancel automatically. Considering this
as best practice, all the Claim documents should be canceled as they won’t be valid for your
accounting records. 
```

Financial Reports
=================

Balance Tributario de 8 Columnas
--------------------------------
This report presents the accounts in detail (with their respective balances), classifying them
according to their origin and determining the level of profit or loss that the business had within
the evaluated period of time, so that a real and complete knowledge of the status of a company. 

You can find this report in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Reports`

.. image:: media/Chile37.png
   :align: center

Propuesta F29
-------------

> The form F29 is a new system that the SII enabled to taxpayers, and that replaces the Purchase and
> Sales Books. This report is integrated by Purchase Register (CR) and the Sales Register (RV)
> its purpose is to support the transactions realted to VAT improving its control and declaration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The form F29 is a new system that the SII enabled to taxpayers, and that replaces the Purchase and
Sales Books. This report is integrated by Purchase Register (CR) and the Sales Register (RV).
Its purpose is to support the transactions related to VAT, improving its control and declaration. 
```

This record is supplied by the electronic tax documents (DTE’s) that have been received by the
SII.

You can find this report in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Accounting --> Reports`

.. image:: media/Chile38.png
   :align: center

> 

Reviewer: [Seealso section?](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/user/13.0/contributing/documentation/rst_cheat_sheet.html#seealso)

Author: > Hello!
> Good job with the rst 👍
> 
> * Ideally, please add _alt_ tags to your images as explained [here](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/user/13.0/contributing/documentation/content_guidelines.html#alt-tags).
> * Ideally, leave a blank line after all titles. For example:
> 
> ```
> Title 1
> =======
> 
> Paragraph here.
> ```
> 
> * Also, could you check the end of some sentences? It seems that there are a lot of sentences being separated by a comma, rather than ending them with a point (e.g. "Sentence 1, sentence 2." instead of "Sentence 1. Sentence 2.")
> * Other comments are directly put on the code.
> * Abreviations such as _it's_ are rather for spoken language. Ideally, write them _it is_ instead.
> 
> Have a good day
> 
> Best regards,
> Jonathan

@jcs-odoo Thank you for the Feedback and the corrections,  I committed you suggestions (sorry  I was doing it individually at the beginning).  In the last commit with I added the Alt information on the images (except from img 16 to 20, as I was having issues with the alt on the nested list, it wasn't working), I also added the blank line after the subtitles. 

Regards.

Author: @jcs-odoo sorry but I don't get in this section it might add the Seealso section.
